Database normalization is the process of organizing the attributes and tables of a relational database to minimize data redundancy.
Normalization involves decomposing a table into less redundant (and smaller) tables but without losing information;
defining foreign keys in the old table referencing the primary keys of the new ones. The objective is to isolate data so that additions, deletions,
and modifications of an attribute can be made in just one table and then propagated through the rest of the database using the defined foreign keys.

Edgar F. Codd, the inventor of the relational model (RM), introduced the concept of normalization and what we now know as the First normal form (1NF) in 1970. 
Codd went on to define the Second normal form (2NF) and Third normal form (3NF) in 1971, 
and Codd and Raymond F. Boyce defined the Boyce-Codd Normal Form (BCNF) in 1974. 
Informally, a relational database table is often described as "normalized" if it is in the Third Normal Form. 
Most 3NF tables are free of insertion, update, and deletion anomalies.

First normal form (1NF) is a property of a relation in a relational database. 
A relation is in first normal form if the domain of each attribute contains only atomic values, 
and the value of each attribute contains only a single value from that domain.

Edgar F. Codd's definition of 1NF makes reference to the concept of 'atomicity'. 
Codd states that the "values in the domains on which each relation is defined are required to be atomic with respect to the DBMS." 
Codd defines an atomic value as one that "cannot be decomposed into smaller pieces by the DBMS (excluding certain special functions)" 
meaning a field should not be divided into parts with more than one kind of data in it such that what one part means to the DBMS depends on another part of the same field.

A table that is in first normal form (1NF) must meet additional criteria if it is to qualify for second normal form. 
Specifically: a table is in 2NF if and only if it is in 1NF and no non-prime attribute is dependent on any proper subset of any candidate key of the table.
A non-prime attribute of a table is an attribute that is not a part of any candidate key of the table.

Third normal form is a normal form used in normalizing a database design to reduce the duplication of data and ensure referential integrity by ensuring that:

1.The entity is in second normal form and
2.All the attributes in a table are determined only by the candidate keys of that table and not by any non-prime attributes.

A typical example of normalization is that an entity's unique ID is stored everywhere in the system but its name is held in only one table.
The name can be updated more easily in one row of one table.
A typical update in such an example would be the RIM company changing its name to BlackBerry. 
That update would be done in one place and immediately the correct "BlackBerry" name would be displayed throughout the system.