A transaction symbolizes a unit of work performed within a database management system (or similar system) against a database, 
and treated in a coherent and reliable way independent of other transactions. A transaction generally represents any change in database.
Transactions in a database environment have two main purposes:

To provide reliable units of work that allow correct recovery from failures and keep a database consistent even in cases of system failure, 
when execution stops (completely or partially) and many operations upon a database remain uncompleted, with unclear status.

To provide isolation between programs accessing a database concurrently. If this isolation is not provided, the program's outcome are possibly erroneous.

The ACID accronym stands for atomic, consistent, isolated, durable. The transaction must be ACID.

In an atomic transaction, a series of database operations either all occur, or nothing occurs. 
The series of operations cannot be divided apart and executed partially from each other, which makes the series of operations "indivisible", hence the name.

Consistency in database systems refers to the requirement that any given database transaction must only change affected data in allowed ways. 
Any data written to the database must be valid according to all defined rules, including constraints, cascades, triggers, and any combination thereof.

In database systems, isolation determines how transaction integrity is visible to other users and systems.

In database systems, durability is the ACID property which guarantees that transactions that have committed will survive permanently. 
For example, if a flight booking reports that a seat has successfully been booked, then the seat will remain booked even if the system crashes.

Transaction log
In the field of databases in computer science, a transaction log (also transaction journal, database log, binary log or audit trail)
is a history of actions executed by a database management system to guarantee ACID properties over crashes or hardware failures. 
Physically, a log is a file listing changes to the database, stored in a stable storage format.