SQL stands for Structured Query Language. SQL is used to communicate with a database. According to ANSI, it is the standard language for relational database 
management systems. SQL statements are used to perform tasks such as update data on a database, or retrieve data from a database. Some common relational database 
management systems that use SQL are: Oracle, Sybase, Microsoft SQL Server, Access, Ingres, etc. Although most database systems use SQL, most of them also have their 
own additional proprietary extensions that are usually only used on their system. However, the standard SQL commands such as "Select", "Insert", "Update", "Delete", 
"Create", and "Drop" can be used to accomplish almost everything that one needs to do with a database.

A data manipulation language (DML) is a family of syntax elements similar to a computer programming language used for selecting, inserting, deleting and updating data 
in a database. Performing read-only queries of data is sometimes also considered a component of DML.

A data definition language or data description language (DDL) is a syntax similar to a computer programming language for defining data structures, especially database 
schemas.

The SELECT statement is used to select data from a database. The result is stored in a result table, called the result-set.

The WHERE clause is used to extract only those records that fulfill a specified criterion.

The ORDER BY keyword is used to sort the result-set by one or more columns. The ORDER BY keyword sorts the records in ascending order by default. To sort the records 
in a descending order, you can use the DESC keyword.

The INSERT INTO statement is used to insert new records in a table.

The UPDATE statement is used to update existing records in a table.

The DELETE statement is used to delete rows in a table.

An SQL JOIN clause is used to combine rows from two or more tables, based on a common field between them.

The INNER JOIN keyword selects all rows from both tables as long as there is a match between the columns in both tables.

The LEFT JOIN keyword returns all rows from the left table (table1), with the matching rows in the right table (table2). The result is NULL in the right side when 
there is no match.

The RIGHT JOIN keyword returns all rows from the right table (table2), with the matching rows in the left table (table1). The result is NULL in the left side when 
there is no match.

The FULL OUTER JOIN keyword returns all rows from the left table (table1) and from the right table (table2). The FULL OUTER JOIN keyword combines the result of both 
LEFT and RIGHT joins.

The UNION operator is used to combine the result-set of two or more SELECT statements.

Notice that each SELECT statement within the UNION must have the same number of columns. The columns must also have similar data types. Also, the columns in each 
SELECT statement must be in the same order.